---
title: "Create Python Executable using Pyinstaller"
date: 2020-07-23 13:59:00
author: "Zach Zeng"
tags:
  - python
  - code
---

# Introduction

Pyinstaller packages pythin applications and its dependencies into a stand-lone executables.

> Pyinstaller can be used across platforms. However, the bundled executable can only be used under the environment it be created. i.e. If you want to create .exe file you need to run pyinstaller under Windows environment.

# Installation

Pyinstaller can be installed through pip:

```shell
pip install pyinstaller
```

### Requirements:

- Python:
  - 2.7 or 3.5-3.7
- Windows:
  - Windows XP or newer
- Mac OS:
  - Mac OS X 10.7(Lion) or newer

# Getting Started

Go to your program's directory and run:

```shell
pyinstaller pythonScriptName.py
```

By default, a folder with all dependencies and executables will be created in a subdirectory called `dist`.

### Bundling to a single executable

```shell
pyinstaller -F pythonScriptName.py
```

or

```shell
pyinstaller --onefile pythonScriptName.py
```

Startup time of the single executable is longer than the folder.

# Questions

## Relative path issue

When file is executed under environment without python or other environments instead of the local machine, the icon is usually not displayed correctly. It is because the file path the executable use has changed.

### Solutions:

- #### Using absolute file path

- #### Freeze file path

  ```python
  import os
  import sys

  config_name = 'myapp.cfg'

  def app_path():
  #return the base application path
    if getattr(sys, 'frozen', False):
        return os.path.dirname(sys.executable)
    elif __file__:
        return os.path.dirname(__file__)

  config_path = os.path.join(application_path, config_name)

  ```

  app_path() return the execute path of the application.

<br>

## Size of executable is too large

- #### Use `from ... import ...` instead of `import`

  The whole package will be bundled if using `import`. Bundled the APIs that you only need.

- #### Pipenv

  When using Anaconda, as Anaconda has lots of built-in libraries, it will bundle many unnecessary modules. To get rid of them, we can use a clean environment and here I choose **_pipenv_**.

  Pipenv is a tool to create and manages a virtualenv for the projects.

  Install pipenv

  ```shell
  pip install pipenv
  ```

  Go to the directory of our project to create a virtual environment.

  ```shell
  pipenv install
  ```

  Activate the project's virtualenv

  ```shell
  pipenv shell
  ```

  Install the necessary dependencies

  ```shell
  pip install pyinstaller
  ...
  ```

  Bundle under this virtual environment

  ```shell
  pyinstaller pythonScriptName.py
  ```

  To delete the virtual environment, go to the project's directory and run `pipenv --rm`
